तदनु नन्दममन्दशुभास्पदं नृपपुरीं करदानकृते गतम्।
समवलोक्य जगाद भवत्पिता विदितकंससहायजनोद्यम: ॥१॥
तदनु नन्दम्-	after that to Nanda
अमन्द-शुभ-आस्पदम्	(who is) of non dimmed virtues the abode
नृप-पुरीम्	to the king's city
कर-दान-कृते गतम्	to pay his tributes (taxes), who had gone
समवलोक्य	seeing (meeting)
जगाद भवत्-पिता	said (to Nanda), Thy father (Vasudeva)
विदित-कंस-	who knew of Kansa's
सहायजन-उद्यम:	and Kansa's supporters' activities
Thereafter, Nanda (who is the abode of undiminished virtues), went to the king's city to pay his tributes (taxes). On meeting him, Thy father Vasudeva who knew of the activities of Kansa and his supporters, told him that.
अयि सखे तव बालकजन्म मां सुखयतेऽद्य निजात्मजजन्मवत् ।
इति भवत्पितृतां व्रजनायके समधिरोप्य शशंस तमादरात् ॥२॥
अयि सखे	O friend!
तव बालक जन्म	to you a son's birth
मां-सुखयते-अद्य	gives me pleasure now
निज-आत्मज-जन्मवत्	my own son's birth like
इति भवत्-पितृतां	thus Thy fatherhood
व्रजनायके समधिरोप्य	to the cowherd chief, (he cleverly) attributed
शशंस तम्-आदरात्	and praised him with affection
"O Friend! The birth of a son to you gives me pleasure as if a son were born to myself." Thus he cleverly attributed Thy fatherhood on Nanda, and praised him with affection.
इह च सन्त्यनिमित्तशतानि ते कटकसीम्नि ततो लघु गम्यताम् ।
इति च तद्वचसा व्रजनायको भवदपायभिया द्रुतमाययौ ॥३॥
इह च सन्ति-	and here there are
अनिमित्त-शतानि	bad omens in hundreds
ते कटक-सीम्नि	at your residence
तत: लघु गम्यताम्	therefore soon (you) should go
इति च तत्-वचसा	and thus, by his (Vaudeva's) words
व्रजनायक:	the cowherd chieftain (Nandagopa)
भवत्-अपाय-भिया	to Thee danger apprehending
द्रुतम्-आययौ	quickly returned
"Here there are bad omens in hundreds and soon at your residence also it will not be safe, so you should return soon". Thus by Vasudeva's words, apprehending danger to Thee, Nanda quickly returned.
अवसरे खलु तत्र च काचन व्रजपदे मधुराकृतिरङ्गना ।
तरलषट्पदलालितकुन्तला कपटपोतक ते निकटं गता ॥४॥
अवसरे खलु तत्र च	at that time, indeed, and there
काचन व्रजपदे	some (female) in Gokula
मधुर-आकृति:-अङ्गना	beautiful looking woman
तरल-षट्पद-	(with) hovering bees
लालित-कुन्तला	around (her) locks of hair (due to the sweet smell)
कपट-पोतक	(O Thou) in the guise of a child!
ते निकटं गता	went near Thee
Just then there in Gokula, some beautiful looking woman with honey bees hovering around the sweet smelling flowers in her hair locks, entered. O Thou! In the guise of a child, she approached Thee.
सपदि सा हृतबालकचेतना निशिचरान्वयजा किल पूतना ।
व्रजवधूष्विह केयमिति क्षणं विमृशतीषु भवन्तमुपाददे ॥५॥
सपदि सा	quickly she
हृत-बालक-चेतना	who had taken the children' lives
निशिचर-अन्वय-जा	of demon clan born
किल पूतना	indeed Pootanaa
व्रज-वधूषु-इह	among the Vraja women here
का-इयम्-इति	who is this, thus
क्षणं विमृशतीषु	for a moment wondering
भवन्तम्-उपाददे	Thee lifted up (in her arms)
Quickly she, Pootanaa, born in the clan of demons, who had taken the lives of many children, lifted Thee up, even as the Vraja women were for a second wondering as to who she was.
ललितभावविलासहृतात्मभिर्युवतिभि: प्रतिरोद्धुमपारिता ।
स्तनमसौ भवनान्तनिषेदुषी प्रददुषी भवते कपटात्मने ॥५॥
ललित-भाव-विलास-	by her charming appearance and graceful movements
हृत-आत्मभि:-युवतिभि:	with captivated minds, the young women
प्रतिरोद्धुम्-अपारिता	to deter (stop) not being able
स्तनम्-असौ	her breasts this (Pootanaa)
भवन-अन्त-निषेदुषी	inside the house sitting
प्रददुषी भवते	gave (her breasts) to Thee
कपट-आत्मने	the illusive child
Her charming appearance and graceful movements captivated the minds of the Gopis who were unable to stop her from making advances. So this Pootanaa took her seat inside the house as she applied Thee, the illusive child, to her breasts.
समधिरुह्य तदङ्कमशङ्कितस्त्वमथ बालकलोपनरोषित: ।
महदिवाम्रफलं कुचमण्डलं प्रतिचुचूषिथ दुर्विषदूषितम् ॥७॥
समधिरुह्य तत्-अङ्कम्-	climbing in her lap
अशङ्कित:-त्वम्-अथ	unhesitatingly Thou then
बालक-लोपन-रोषित:	by the children' killing angered
महत्-इव-आम्र-फलम्	huge, as if it were a mango fruit
कुच-मण्डलं प्रति-चुचूषिथ	the breast, sucked well
दुर्विष-दूषितम्	with strong poison smeared
Thou who were angered by her killing of the children, unhesitatingly climbed in her lap and sucked well her poison smeared breasts as if it were a huge mango fruit.
असुभिरेव समं धयति त्वयि स्तनमसौ स्तनितोपमनिस्वना ।
निरपतद्भयदायि निजं वपु: प्रतिगता प्रविसार्य भुजावुभौ ॥८॥
असुभि:-एव समम्	her life breath along with
धयति त्वयि स्तनम्-	sucking (when) Thou were the breast
असौ स्तनित-उपम-निस्वना	this Pootanaa, with thunder like noise
निरपतत्-	fell down
भयदायि निजं वपु:	ferocious her own body
प्रतिगता	reverting to
प्रविसार्य भुजौ-उभौ	out stretching both the hands
Thou sucked the breast along with her life force. This Pootanaa fell down with a thunder like noise reverting to her natural ferocious body with both hands stretching out.
भयदघोषणभीषणविग्रहश्रवणदर्शनमोहितवल्लवे ।
व्रजपदे तदुर:स्थलखेलनं ननु भवन्तमगृह्णत गोपिका: ।।९॥
भयद-घोषण-	the terrifying sound
भीषण-विग्रह-	and the frightful form
श्रवण-दर्शन-	hearing and seeing
मोहित-वल्लवे	(which) stunned the gopas
व्रजपदे	and (the whole of) Gokul
तत्-उदर:-स्थल-	on her chest
खेलनं ननु	playing indeed
भवन्तम्-अगृह्णत	Thee picked up
गोपिका:	the Gopis
The whole of Gokul stood stunned hearing the terrifying sound and seeing the frightful form. The Gopis picked Thee up even as Thou were playing on the chest of the dead demoness.
भुवनमङ्गलनामभिरेव ते युवतिभिर्बहुधा कृतरक्षण: ।
त्वमयि वातनिकेतननाथ मामगदयन् कुरु तावकसेवकम् ॥१०॥
भयद-घोषण-	the terrifying sound
भीषण-विग्रह-	and the frightful form
श्रवण-दर्शन-	hearing and seeing
मोहित-वल्लवे	(which) stunned the gopas
व्रजपदे	and (the whole of) Gokul
तत्-उदर:-स्थल-	on her chest
खेलनं ननु	playing indeed
भवन्तम्-अगृह्णत	Thee picked up
गोपिका:	the Gopis